---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: Immune System Pro
date: 2014-04-25
labels:
  - Systems
  - Health/Medicine
---

*This is the final paper from my last Computer Science Class-- "SYSTEMS DESIGN – SYSTEMS THINKING: The Art, Science, Psychology and Philosophy of Design". Our task was to design a solution to a problematic system, or to come up with our own system of any kind. I chose to come up with my own-- a system for improving the quality and service of health. It is a highly imaginative stance, but if it can become a reality one day, its effects could be incredibly useful.*

# Immune System Pro

The Human Antimalware Project aims to create a system that is able to monitor the health of human individuals and detect and eliminate diseases. Much like a computer antivirus program monitors a computer and makes periodic scans for malicious content, the Human Antimalware Project would include devices that are “installed” into individuals and “scan” for abnormalities. The devices would check against a downloadable database that would be frequently updated to keep up with newly discovered anomalies. With this system, a person could get instantaneous and accurate diagnoses of illnesses, as well as receive treatment.

This project is rooted in the general area of health and the immune system; and related key concepts include autonomy and the disintermediation of physicians. Important notions also include safety and security; because the project will deal directly with people’s health, it needs to be reliably safe, and it also needs to be secure from malicious tampering (e.g. bypassing or blurring the database, minimizing false positives/negatives, etc.).

The motivation for this project comes from the lack of human capacity to be thoroughly knowledgeable of all illnesses. Computers can store the data for every known disease, virus, cancer, and other health ailments much more accurately and reliably than humans can. By observing the effectiveness of antivirus programs in protecting computers against malicious software, that behavior can be emulated in humans. Rather than attempting to eliminate diseases from the outside the body, increasing the defense on the inside as an extension of the immune system will be effective in mitigating illnesses.

Methodologies for this project will be mostly take the shape of investigative research—understanding the concepts of the human immune system, looking at preexisting studies in the field, and devising a solution considering the advantages and limitations of previous studies and experiments, using Top-Down design techniques.

The human immune system is the basis for monitoring and maintaining health, without which illness and death would quickly occur. Enhancing the immune system with technology would allow people to live healthier lives with far reduced risks of becoming sick from all sorts of illnesses from the common cold to cancer to AIDS. Several concepts attempted with modifying the immune system include blocking proteins that help regulate the immune system and developing nanoscale machines to replicate the behavior of the immune system (Gibson and Pettypiece, 2010; Holmes, 2004). This paper provides a new design model for enhancing the immune system, not by tricking it or replicating it entirely, but by mocking the communication signals within the immune system to coax specific behavior.

The magazine article by Gibson and Pettypiece (2010) introduced a method of “immune therapy treatment” by the company Bristol-Myers Squibb in which a drug called ipilimumab sped up the immune system by blocking the protein CTLA-4 which regulates the immune system, thereby allowing more white blood cells to attack cancerous tumors.<sup>1</sup> The hypothesis of Bristol-Meyers’ method was that this would allow more aggressive treatment of tumors than what would normally occur. While the results supported the hypothesis over longer periods of treatment, in the early stages painful side effects emerged and the treatment appeared ineffective. One limitation of this study is the lack of multiple clinical trials. This leaves the results largely unsupported and restricts its credibility. Another concern with the study is that the treatment requires painful symptoms and intensifying sickness initially as part of the process. Although effective in the end with the sample set tested on, painful treatment is not ideal, and if the illness needs to be worsened before improvement, patients are likely to resist and resent treatment.
  
Taking on a much more engineering-related approach, the article by Holmes (2004) introduces a study to create a device to sense and latch onto pathogens the same way that the immune system naturally does. Chemist Hiroshi Matsui and his team experimented with guiding nanotubes to specific locations by coating them with antibodies, which has a natural affinity towards specific foreign antigens. The goal is for this antibody-antigen affinity to act as a sensor to guide nanotubes to pathogens, from which treatment procedures can take place. A major limitation to this system is that it requires physical components be utilized in surgery-like procedures, meaning that the process cannot proceed continuously on its own. The study suggests a capacity of “thousands of different pathogens on a single chip,”<sup>2</sup> but with the order of pathogens reaching beyond millions, capacity limitations would become a bottleneck in the process.

The immune system is a tireless machine that works around the clock to protect the body from diseases, infections, and illnesses. Scanning particles day and night, the body aims to keep in what should be there, and keep out what shouldn’t. Today’s computer antivirus programs work in much of the same way. Computers can be scanned for “viruses” and other malicious software, and if found, those malicious files can be removed. Antivirus programs know what is benign and what is malignant by checking against a frequently updated database of known viruses. In the case of the human immune system, the body is able to detect whether a particle is friendly or foreign, and attacks those that are marked as foreign.

Lymphocytes, specific types of white blood cells are the main components of the immune system. These cells travel through and alongside blood vessels, constantly monitoring the body for foreign contaminants. Think of them as patrolling police units making routine rounds, except that they are constantly working without breaks. When antigens (foreign bacteria and viruses) are detected, they are carried away to lymph nodes where they are charged for their “criminal offenses”. This is why the throat swells up when the body is infected with a cold virus. Specific lymphocytes called B cells secrete armies of antibodies to attack antigens, and once they do their job, a few antibodies remain on watch in case the same antigen returns in the future. Each B cell programs and produces a specific type of antibody, but some antigens can interlock with several different antibodies and become marked for removal.

The immune system is methodical, scanning the area for suspicious suspects, programming the appropriate weapon for combat, and disposing of the unwelcome visitors. Creating a supplement to this system is fairly straight-forward if this orderly convention is followed. A Human Antimalware system would at its basis encode parts of the human immune system so that some of its processes can be duplicated and replicated. Antigens and antibodies can be expressed as digital data in the form of their unique protein sequences, so an entire database of malicious particles and their respective antidotes can be distributed to anyone. This means that once a specific antigen is discovered and its antibody is formed, anyone can be protected from the illness that the antigen would cause.

The Human Antimalware system would consist of two main components: a database housing the genetic information of all discovered antigens, and a microscopic device that would be implanted or “installed” into the human user’s blood stream or in one of the lymphoid organs: lymph nodes, bone marrow, the thymus, and the spleen, which produce the lymphocyte white blood cells. The device would be a permanent fixture in the body, communicating with the immune system to supply the body with information to program new antibodies, as well as to wirelessly receive data on newly discovered antigens so that it can be added to the global database of malicious particles. The device would routinely synchronize with the database to ensure that newly added data from all the other users is updated on the device, and that any new data discovered by any user’s device contributes to the database. The system would work very much like any computer antivirus program would, only with the client side playing a much larger role in contributing to the database.

Although improving the human immune system would suggest that Human Antimalware is more suited for Bottom-Up designing, the in fact far-reaching goals of improvement make a Top-Down design paradigm more appropriate. The goal of Human Antimalware would be to “protect anyone from any illnesses”, heightening the quality and duration of life. Measurable objectives would include: “reduce the number of illnesses suffered by at least half” and “reduce the number of cases a particular strain of illness is reported to one.” Differential requirements include “synchronous communication with the database”, “interruption-free integration into the user’s life”, “autonomy”, and “instantaneousness.”

For general public use, the Human Antimalware supplement would significantly lower the amount of diseases a user would catch. Preexisting illnesses would be prevented from spreading, so only newly formed diseases would be of a concern to the public. No longer would there be the need to avoid contagious people; contagiousness would be eliminated altogether. The only way that a specific illness could be suffered by more than one person would be if those people were infected simultaneously.

In addition to augmenting the typical user’s immune system, Human Antimalware technology could help patients who suffer from immunodeficiency or autoimmune disorders. Patients with immunodeficiency would normally suffer from an incomplete or altogether missing immune system, therefore being open to many or all foreign contaminants without the proper defense mechanisms. These patients will benefit from acquiring a predefined starter to bolster the lacking parts of their immune system, protecting the body against any known antigens. Autoimmune patients have the inability to recognize the body’s own healthy cells as being nonthreatening, and their immune system treats those cells as threats. In this case, the Human Antimalware device can be trained to learn and whitelist the body’s own cells and override the immune system’s reaction to attack benign cells, in addition to providing the general supplementary protection.

Considering the path from concept to reality, one main issue that arises is the immense complexity and uniqueness of the body and its genetics. Even though on average the DNA sequence from one human being to another differs by only 0.1 percent<sup>3</sup>, that relatively miniscule amount is enough to ensure that no two human beings are exactly the same, even in a macroscopic view. On the microscopic level, the cells that function in the body are even more widely and frequently diverse. The high degree of individuality conflicts with the notion of functioning alongside a normalized system. For the Human Antimalware system to be widely effective, individuality will need to be taken into account; simply a regularized database will not suffice.

Another main struggle will be the physical process of constructing the device itself. The device will need to be programmed and built so that not only can it communicate with the immune system to produce the proper antibodies from the database, but also conversely monitor and sequence newly discovered antigens and their respective antibodies so that it can be relayed back to the database for distribution. Ensuring that the device is compatible with the human body, yet able to function at the level of intricacy of the immune system would be a difficult yet essential task.

The immune system is a rather delicate system, and tampering with it could be a detrimental process. Or, it can be said that the system is so robust that it would resist having an addition to it, even if it is an enhancement. The immune system is, after all, designed to combat foreign objects, and a supplemental system is still a foreign object and therefore could be considered a threat to the body. Special measures must be considered to ensure acceptance of the Antimalware device by the body, and also that the device will not be in conflict with the body’s own immune system. Sending extraneous signals to B cells to produce antibodies may result in using up too many of them, leaving not enough to produce other necessary antibodies. Another possibility is that multiple signals can clash while attempting to communicate with B cells and erroneously produce a “mutated” antibody, being non-effective or actually harmful to the body. Unlike computer antivirus programs, the Human Antimalware system will directly affect human life, so extreme caution and accident-prevention procedures will be indispensable.

The use of technology warrants the attention to software security, just as computer antivirus software does. Antivirus software can become ineffective either by being bypassed or compromised, causing security to be breached with potentially harmful side effects. The same can happen with the software in the Human Antimalware system, whether in the central database or the individual devices themselves. A breach in the security could allow a malicious user to inject a false autoimmunity- or immunodeficiency-causing code, sending the world into an instantaneous pandemic state. A system for disabling unauthorized input, as well as testing new entries before updating the database would be necessary to provide even the basic level of security.

With the impact of a Human Antimalware system being so large, many ethical issues are sure to arise. One side effect of augmenting the immune system would be moral hazard— taking advantage of the system. Permanent health monitoring and treatment administering would likely result in easing responsibility off users to take care of themselves. The empowerment of the system would give the impression of “immunity” in its true sense—meaning invulnerability, leading to reckless activity such as excessive intoxication through drugs and alcohol, exposure to poisonous plants and animals, or swimming in the Ala Wai. If having skin in the game enforces valuing personal health and well-being, then having less skin in the game would probably be used to justify recklessness.

Another ethical issue is the likely side effect of doctors becoming disintermediated, especially primary care physicians. With fewer people getting illnesses, the need to seek out health care attention will decline, and the job of doctors will phase out of convention. However, this could be a beneficial effect, as relatively menial responsibilities such as addressing and diagnosing simple health concerns are moved to the quicker and more precise computers, and doctors are freed up to address more complex medical issues or conduct research. This may also alleviate some pressure off of medical students and aspiring medical professionals to be educated in such a wide variety of fields. Rather, they can focus on more specific fields of study early on and delve more in depth, becoming better equipped to perform research to help advance the knowledge base of their field. Computers are far better equipped than humans are to obtain information easily, store more of it longer without forgetting, and retrieve that information quickly and accurately, so it only makes sense to have computers do what they are well-suited to perform, and allow human medical professionals to focus their attention where it is more needed. The transition to this new state will be the most difficult, because doctors who are already practicing professionals will be hesitant to lose their job, but once in place, the health care industry would be much more efficient and beneficial.

Health is always a prime concern for human beings, and yet it is not being advanced very much in ways that will allow for more efficient and effective benefits. Partly it is due to the safety precautions that need to be taken with care when tampering with human lives, but yet there are many things that can be done to at least begin to head in the right direction. Technology is well within the scope of handling simple medical tasks, and before long can be expanded to take over more and more complex responsibilities. It is a losing battle to attempt maintaining health with human hands alone. Biology has had billions of years to develop into the advanced complexity that it has today, and trying to catch up with the work of slow minds and even slower hands will be a never ending struggle. The Human Antimalware project presented in this paper only covers a small portion of health issues, and would require years of research and development, but if there is to be any hope of gaining a better control over human wellbeing, something of this scale must be done.

## References
Gibson, Ellen, and Shannon Pettypiece. "Training the Immune System to Fight Cancer." Bloomsberg Businessweek, May 31, 2010, 34-36.

Holmes, Bob. "How to build a nanomachine." New Scientist, July 10, 2004, 19.

Jorde, Lynn, and Stephen Wooding. "Genetic variation, classification and 'race'." Nature Genetics 36, no. 11 (2004): S28. http://www.nature.com/ng/journal/v36/n11s/pdf/ng1435.pdf (accessed April 20, 2014).

Sompayrac, Lauren. How the immune system works. 2nd ed. Malden, Mass.: Blackwell Publishing, 2003.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Cancer Institute. “Understanding the Immune System: How It Works.” NIH Publication No. 03-5423, 2003. Retrieved from http://permanent.access.gpo.gov/lps45274/the_immune_system.pdf
